http://ec.europa.eu/environment/circular-economy/

        European  Commission
Environment
Accessibility toolsService toolsLanguage selectorNavigation pathHigh level navigationHigh level navigationAdditional tools                     As part of its continuous effort to transform Europe's economy into a more sustainable one and to implement the ambitious Circular Economy Action Plan, in January 2018 the European Commission adopted a new set of measures, including:  2018 Circular Economy package - key documents:  Two years after the adoption of EU Circular Economy Action Plan, more than half of the initiatives foreseen in the Plan have been delivered. To discuss the measures included in the 2018 Circular Economy Package, explore new areas of action, and share the first achievements of the European Circular Economy Stakeholder Platform, the Commission and the European Economic and Social Committee will host the 2018 edition of the Circular Economy Stakeholder Conference on 20-21 February in Brussels. You can find more information on the Circular Economy Stakeholder PlatformThe European Circular Economy Stakeholder Platform is a virtual open space which aims at promoting Europe's transition to a circular economy by facilitating policy dialogue among stakeholders and by disseminating activities, information, and good practices on the circular economy. Stakeholders can take part in the Platform by participating in the annual conference and by interacting on the website to look for good practices, to engage with other stakeholders and to share their own good practices and events. The members of the Coordination Group contribute to gather best practices on circular economy, to raise awareness about existing national, regional or local strategies, to identify challenges and opportunities for the transition to a circular economy among policy makers, businesses, trade unions, civil society, etc. List of organisations – members of the Coordination Group:.
More information: http://circulareconomy.europa.eu/platform/ The European Commission adopted an ambitious Circular  Economy Package, which includes measures that will help stimulate Europe's transition  towards a circular economy, boost global competitiveness, foster  sustainable economic growth and generate new jobs. The Circular Economy Package consists of an EU Action Plan for the Circular  Economy that establishes a concrete  and ambitious programme of action, with measures covering the whole cycle: from production and consumption to waste  management and the market for secondary raw materials and a revised legislative prposal on waste. The annex to the action plan sets out the timeline when the actions will be  completed. The proposed actions will contribute to "closing the loop" of product lifecycles through greater  recycling and re-use, and bring benefits for both the environment and the  economy.  The revised  legislative proposals on waste set  clear targets for reduction of waste and establish an ambitious and credible  long-term path for waste management and recycling. Key elements of the  revised waste proposal include: The following legislative  proposals on waste have been adopted:
  More information:Circular  Economy Package: Press release and questions & answers
Factsheet: Closing  the Loop: Helping consumers choose sustainable products and services
Factsheet: Closing  the Loop: The Production Phase of the Circular Economy
Factsheet: Closing  the Loop: Clear Targets and Tools for Better Waste Management
Factsheet: Closing  the Loop: From Waste to Resources  In December 2014,  the Commission decided to withdraw its  legislative proposal on  waste, but  the Commission  committed at  the same  time to use its new horizontal  working methods to present a new package by the end of 2015 which would cover  the full economic cycle, not just waste reduction targets, drawing on the  expertise of all the Commission's services. Previous proposal on circular economy: The International Resource PanelWork on resource efficiency and circular economy has profited inter alia from the reports and assessments of the International Resource Panel (IRP). More information on the role of the IRP and its relations with the European Commission can be found here.   