https://epthinktank.eu/
Most of the plastic in our oceans originates from land-based sources. On European beaches, plastics make up 80-85 % of marine litter, which is considered a major threat to marine and coastal biodiversity. Marine litter also costs the European Union economy an estimated €259 million to €695 million per year. Continue reading →The July plenary session highlights were: the continuation of the debate on the Future of Europe, this time with the Prime Minister of Poland, Mateusz Morawiecki, the discussion on the outcome of the European Council meeting of 28-29 June 2018, and the review of the Bulgarian and presentation of the activities of the Austrian Presidencies. Continue reading →In the aftermath of the United Kingdom’s decision to leave the European Union (EU), following the referendum of June 2016, the EU launched a profound reflection on the Future of Europe, which continues in various fora and institutions. Continue reading →As a citizen of Europe, you are naturally interested in what results the EU has delivered for you, your family, your business, and your wellbeing. This series of 60 SECONDS podcasts is designed to answer the question you probably asked: what has the EU done for me? Continue reading →The Juncker Commission has now been in office for more than three years. With only one full calendar year to go until the end of its mandate, many consider that 2018 will be judged as ‘the year of delivery’. Continue reading →‘Ten issues to watch in 2018’ was presented in the Library of the European Parliament on 11 January, in the context of a roundtable discussion that attracted an audience of more than 130 people. The significant attendance demonstrated the high interest in the publication – the second edition of an annual EPRS publication designed to identify key issues and policy areas that are likely to feature prominently on the political agenda of the European Union over the coming year. Continue reading →We begin 2018 with an exciting new European Parliamentary Research Service product! As of this week, you can download our brand new app to keep up-to-date with EPRS publications, and read them anywhere at any time on your smartphone or tablet. Continue reading →Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.Join 2,633 other followers





 
The content of all documents (and articles) contained in this blog is the sole responsibility of the author and any opinions expressed therein do not necessarily represent the official position of the European Parliament. It is addressed to the Members and staff of the EP for their parliamentary work. Reproduction and translation for non-commercial purposes are authorised, provided the source is acknowledged and the European Parliament is given prior notice and sent a copy. For a comprehensive description of our cookie and data protection policies, please visit Terms and Conditions page.Copyright © European Union, 2014-2018. All rights reserved.

					European Parliamentary Research Service Blog				
Blog at WordPress.com. 