http://docplayer.net/9826167-How-crisis-resistant-and-competitive-are-europe-s-eco-industries.html





                                                                Error: 
1 How crisis-resistant and competitive are Europe s Eco- Industries? Benjamin Görlach Lucas Porsch Dominic Marcellino Adam Pearson January 2014 Ecologic Institute, Berlin2 About the Ecologic Institute The Ecologic Institute is a private not-for-profit think tank for applied environmental research, policy analysis and consultancy with offices in Berlin, Brussels, Vienna, and Washington DC. An independent, non-partisan body, the Ecologic Institute is dedicated to bringing fresh ideas to environmental policies and sustainable development. The Ecologic Institute's work programme focuses on obtaining practical results. It covers the entire spectrum of environmental issues, including the integration of environmental concerns into other policy fields. Founded in 1995, the Ecologic Institute is a partner in the network of Institutes for European Environmental Policy. The Ecologic Institute acts in the public interest; donations are tax-deductible.3 Table of Contents Main findings of the study Introduction Data source Development of Eco-Industries Turnover and growth of Eco-Industries Competitiveness and Resilience of Eco-Industries Innovation in the Eco-Industries Patenting activity in environmental industries Patenting activity in environmental industries across countries Patenting activity for selected environment-related technologies Patenting activity in Europe compared to the US and China Public funding for environmental research Country Briefs European countries Germany Italy Poland Portugal UK Non-European countries China Mexico US Conclusions and recommendations References i4 List of Tables Table 1: Growth rates and shares of different LCEGS sub-sectors... 9 Table 2: Growth rates in LCEGS and GDP for eight countries, Source: Eurostat and IMF Table 3: Shares and growth rates of patent applications for environment-related technologies, EU, China and USA Table 4: Share of environmental research in state expenditure for civil R&D, Table 5: All private investment vs. investment in renewables in Germany, Table 6: Nominal growth rates in LCEGS and GDP for Italy, Table 7: Nominal growth rates in LCEGS and GDP for Poland, Table 8: GDP growth and renewable share in Portugal, Table 9: Nominal growth rates in LCEGS and GDP for Portugal, Table 10: Development of sub-sectors in the UK Table 11: Nominal growth rates in LCEGS and GDP for the UK, Table 12: Nominal growth rates in LCEGS and GDP for China, Table 13: Nominal growth rates in LCEGS and GDP for Mexico, Table 14: Nominal growth rates in LCEGS and GDP for US, List of Figures Figure 1: Size of the LCEGS sector (in % of GDP) and annual growth, Figure 2: Number of patent applications for environment-related technologies in eight selected countries, Source: OECD ENV-Tech Indicator Set Figure 3: Patent applications for selected environment-related technologies in the EU-28, Source: OECD ENV-Tech Indicator Set Figure 4: Patenting activity for selected technologies in the EU-28, (2000 = 100). Source: OECD ENV-Tech Indicator Set Figure 5: Number of patent applications for selected environmental management technologies in the EU, China and the US, Source: OECD ENV-Tech Figure 6: Number of patent applications for selected renewable energy technologies in the EU, China and the US, Source: OECD ENV-Tech Indicator Set Figure 7: Number of patent applications for selected energy efficiency technologies in the EU, China and the US, Source: OECD ENV-Tech Indicator Set Figure 8: Power production in Germany ii5 Main findings of the study Since 2007, Eco-Industries have been growing globally at a relatively stable pace of around 3-4% a year. Compared to the rest of the economy, and especially compared to other industrial output, the rate of growth of Eco-Industries was much higher during the financial and economic crisis of 2008 and 2009, but slightly lower since then. Eco-Industries thus served as an economic stabilizer during the recession. Eco-Industries in Europe have been able to consolidate and defend their competitive position in recent years. The global market share (22%) of European Eco-Industries was stable over this period, despite the fact that overall economic growth in Europe was much weaker than the world average during this period. European Eco-Industries have thus remained globally competitive and are keeping up with the global expansion of the sector, and act as a stabilising factor in the turbulent economic climate in Europe. But Eco-Industries have not only had a stabilising effect they have also been a driver of growth, particularly in Europe. In four of the five European countries considered in this study, Eco-Industries have grown faster than GDP between 2008 and In Italy and Portugal, where nominal GDP has stagnated during this period, Eco-Industries have grown by 9.4 and 5%, respectively, from 2008 to But also in Germany, whose economy remained relatively robust during the crisis, Eco-Industries were a driver of growth, with an increase of 13% between 2008 and There are inherent reasons why Eco-Industries have outperformed the rest of the economy, particularly during the economic crisis. For instance, Eco-Industries are a highly innovative segment of the economy. Particularly since 2005, innovation activity in most Eco-Industries has increased markedly. This is documented by an increasing number of patents: particularly for renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies, patenting activity has grown much quicker than the economy-wide average across all technologies. Another main reason why Eco-Industries could play this counter-cyclical role is the dependence of many Eco-Industries on government spending, policies, and investments. Many governments increased public spending during the crisis and some of that spending was used on energy and other infrastructure, specifically benefiting or intentionally stimulating the Eco-Industries. On the other hand, after the stimulus spending of 2009 many governments have had to cut their spending, which in many countries has led predictably to slower growth of Eco-Industries. This is not to say that Eco-Industries have gone through the crisis unscathed: Eco-Industries are not detached from the rest of the economy. Thus, the overall weak investment in the crisis years and its aftermath has also affected investment in Eco-Industries, albeit to a lesser degree than the rest of the economy. For the purposes of this study, we analysed eight countries (five from Europe and three outside Europe) in more detail, looking at the characteristics of their Eco-Industries, the countries respective policies and investment strategies, as well as the areas where their economies or private sectors are global leaders in Eco-Industry subsectors. Our analysis found that the countries differed both in the growth rate of Eco-Industries and in the current size of Eco-Industries. Compared to GDP, the size of the Eco Industry sector ranged 16 between 3.5% and 5% and growth rates varied between 5% and 25% between 2007 and In looking at the role that national policies play in driving investment and growth of Eco- Industries, we found that green government policies tended to be responsible for strong growth of Eco-Industries, but with exceptions. Thus, the overall economic situation is another key factor for the development of Eco-Industries, with countries with poor economic performance also lagging behind in the development of Eco-industries. By contrast, a country such as Poland has seen strong growth in Eco-industries in a rapidly growing economy and yet, Poland is the only European country considered in this study where Eco-Industries have grown less than GDP. The fact that this growth was not underpinned by an equally strong government strategy for Eco-Industries in Poland as in other countries may have contributed to this result. Another case in point is the US example, where modest growth in Eco- Industries coincides with limited environmental policy ambition, at least at the national level. One reason for a strong link between overall economic development and development of Eco-Industries is the predominantly local structure of many Eco-Industries. Even though equipment can be exported and imported, much of the value added of Eco-Industries is locally bound as installation and maintenance of appliances have to be provided regionally. This means that the economic effects of Eco-Industries can be substantial, even if there is no large domestic industry for the manufacture of equipment. But it also means that the local business climate, and propensity to invest, is an important factor for the growth in Eco- Industries. To examine the growth of Eco-Industries, we focused on different sub sectors in the countries observed. While renewable energy was an important industry in nearly all countries, sometimes its importance was even eclipsed by the classical environmental goods and services sector. One example of this was Poland, where the EU structural funds were used to update the infrastructure in waste treatment, water treatment and air pollution leading to growth in Eco-Industries; the case is the same in Mexico. These industries may be less dynamic and, possibly, less glamorous than the renewable energy industries, yet they still provide an important part of the value added of Eco-Industries. Using OECD data on patent applications for environment-related technologies, we also analysed the innovation performance of Eco-Industries. According to the data, Eco-Industries outperformed the rest of the economy in terms of patent applications, especially since 2005, when patent applications for environmental technologies increased markedly. Most of this increase stems from energy-related technologies (renewable energy technologies and energy efficiency); the performance of the classical environmental management technologies (such as water and air pollution abatement or waste management) is less dynamic. This increase in innovation activity is fairly consistent across countries yet the overall distribution of patenting activity between countries is very unequal, with some (particular larger) countries featuring a large number of patent applications, and some (particularly smaller) countries hardly registering at all. In terms of the distribution of patenting activity beyond the EU, the big picture is that of a neck-to-neck race between the EU and the US, with advantages in some technologies for Europe, and in others for the US. China ranks much lower in terms of the absolute amount of patent applications, yet features very high growth rates in patent applications for many technologies, and could catch up with Europe and the US in a decade or two if these trends persist. In terms of annual renewable energy investment and systems manufacturing, China leads both the US and the EU. 27 One key lesson from recent experience with Eco-Industries is that policymakers should not rely on a strict one-to-one relationship between investment volumes in Eco-Industries and green economy infrastructure and the permanent establishment of (global) market leaders in those Eco-Industries. While this has been achieved in some Eco-Industries, especially massproduced, transportable products, this is not the case of every element of the value chain. Also, the example of solar photovoltaic (PV) manufacturing shows that industrial leadership always needs to be defended against competitors and may erode very quickly. Yet the important observation is that international competition will only affect part of the value chain, particularly the manufacturing equipment. While it may be desirable for different reasons to have international champions in the Eco-Industries operating out of Europe, it is also true that most of the value added and employment is generated by other activities, such as the planning, installation or maintenance of equipment. Thus, local and regional employment effects from investment in Eco-Industries remain robust regardless of where equipment is manufactured; by tailoring government support in a way that encourages innovation and investment the EU can create sustainably competitive jobs in the Eco-Industries; it just will not be able to capture all manufacturing value-added and employment. Many of the most successful government interventions have been investment support schemes, which provided investors with a high degree of investment certainty. Especially in difficult economic times, governments can induce significant private investment in the Eco- Industries by providing the certainty that investors cannot get elsewhere. 38 1 Introduction According to OECD and Eurostat, Eco-Industries are activities which produce goods and services to measure, prevent, limit, minimise or correct environmental damage to water, air and soil, as well as problems related to waste, noise and eco-systems. This includes technologies, products and services that reduce environmental risk and minimize pollution and resources. 1 Eco-Industries are more than renewable electricity hardware, energy efficiency improvements, electric vehicles, and advanced biofuels. In fact, many of the categories contained under Eco-Industries are established and robust industries (like wastewater management) that require significant capital investments and employ large numbers of people. The European Union and its Member States have identified Eco-Industries as an important pillar of growth and international competitiveness in the near- and medium-term. In this, the EU is not alone, as policymakers in China, the USA, and other global competitors have also recognized the importance and (export) growth potential of Eco-Industries. This study can build on previous research assessing the size and robustness of European Eco-Industries. A 2009 study on Eco-Industries is highlighted by the European Commission on its website: "in 2008, the EU eco-industry provided 4 million jobs. With a turnover of 300 billion and a growth rate of 8% a year, eco-industries are a key contributor to the Europe 2020 strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. Europe is leading the way globally in exploiting technological and economic opportunities in eco-industry. It is ahead in recycling with a 50% market share, water supply with 30% and renewable energy with 40%. However, in certain areas, global competitors are in a better position. While the EU focuses on pollution abatement, waste management and integrated chain management, Japan and the USA concentrate on hardware development and eco-design, enabling them to take the lead in hybrid cars, cradle-tocradle approach and eco-design." This study provides an overview on how the Eco-Industries have developed in five European countries over the last six years and whether their competitive position has been strengthened or weakened. The study provides an internal assessment of the situation in Europe, allowing for inter-country comparisons. Further, it assesses the performance of three non-eu countries: China, Mexico, and the USA. These countries were selected for their different economic compositions (which allow for comparisons either to the EU as a whole or individual Member States), but also due to the size of their Eco-Industry sectors, which generally tracked values in the EU. For these eight countries, the main driving factors of Eco industry growth were assessed and summarised. The sectors where a country s Eco- Industries have established market leadership positions are highlighted, as are areas of weakness or those in need of improvement. The report also develops recommendations for supporting further growth in Eco-Industries in the assessment countries. 1 Bilsen and Rademaekers, Study on the Competitiveness of the EU Eco-industry. 49 The contents of the report are divided as follows: Chapter 2 describes the data source of the report; Chapter 3 summarizes the development of Eco-Industries in Europe and the world; Chapter 4 provides an overview on innovation in Eco-Industries; and Chapter 5 summarises and highlights the development of Eco-Industries in the eight sample countries. 510 2 Data source Assessing Eco-Industries across countries in the EU and internationally presents predictable data gathering and comparability challenges. One major challenge is the identification of a dataset capable of providing comparable statistics for a number of relevant countries. As the definitions of environmental goods and services differ widely between countries and no international data provider (e.g. OECD or Eurostat) could provide a consistently defined dataset over the relevant period of 2007 to 2012, we had to turn elsewhere. The UK Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (BIS) has collected information on low carbon and environmental goods and services (LCEGS) since 2006/07 and provides a yearly update of this assessment. The BIS definition of LCEGS offers a more comprehensive look at the data than the Eurostat definition, 2 as BIS includes the value chain of environmental goods and services. Thus, for instance, the Eurostat definition would include the manufacture of wind turbine components as an Eco-Industry, if these components are built by a specialised manufacturer who reports this activity as environment-related. Yet, the manufacture of a gearbox for a wind turbine by an external supplier might not be included, but rather classified as general manufacturing. As many countries are specifically interested in capturing elements of the value chain, there is also a strong argument to be made that this dataset gives a more robust view of developments in Eco-Industries. The 2009 EU-commissioned report on the Competitiveness of the EU Eco-Industry credits the BIS LCEGS report for its exhaustive and comprehensive LCEGS methodology. 3 The BIS dataset is also fairly large in terms of country coverage, giving an overview on the development of Eco-Industries in the last 5 years in up to 50 countries worldwide. The BIS defines the LCEGS sector as a flexible, umbrella term for capturing activities across a range of traditional sectors. 4 The sectors and major subsectors in the BIS assessment are clarified as follows: Environmental (Air Pollution, Contaminated Land, Environmental Consultancy, Environmental Monitoring, Marine Pollution Control, Noise & Vibration Control, Recovery and Recycling, Waste Management, Water Supply and Wastewater Treatment) Renewable Energy (Biomass, Geothermal, Hydro, Photovoltaic, Wave & Tidal, Wind, Renewable Consulting 2 The methodology is set out in: Low carbon and environmental goods and services: an industry analysis, 2009,  3 Study on the Competitiveness of the EU eco-industry. DG Enterprise and Industry, 2009, page ,  4 U.K. Department for Business Innovation & Skills, Low Carbon Environmental Goods and Services (LCEGS) Report for 2011/11 Low Carbon (Additional Energy Sources, Alternative Fuel/ Vehicle, Alternative Fuels, Building Technologies, Energy Management, Carbon Capture & Storage, Carbon Finance, Nuclear Power) 5 The LCEGS analysis includes: Companies that solely provide LCEGS products and services Companies who are 100% providers of components or inputs into sub assemblies or final LCEGS products and services delivered by others Companies who provide components or inputs into sub assemblies or final assemblies of LCEGS products and services. 6 How resilient have eco-industries been to the impacts of the economic crisis, esp. in comparison to other economic sectors? In which eco-industries where is the EU leading, where are competitors leading, have there been changes over the last five years? We have chosen a subset of 8 countries (5 EU member states and 3 others) for the purpose of our analysis. The main criteria for the choice of the countries were: Data availability Importance of country as an industry location Significantly slower or stronger growth of Eco-Industries Significant (relative) size of eco-industries Using those criteria, the following countries were selected: Germany, UK, Portugal, Poland and Italy, as the EU Member States and China, Mexico, and the USA as non-eu countries. These 8 countries should provide a broad overview of the development of the Eco-industries and allow interesting points of comparison. For example, the relative position of the USA and China is valuable as a point of comparison to the EU as a whole notwithstanding the ability to compare their respective performance to the individual Member States while Mexico is a good point of comparison to EU Member States still building out elements of their Eco- Industries. 5 A note on nuclear power: the LCEGS definition includes nuclear powers among a range of low-carbon technologies. This marks a difference to other definitions of Eco-Industries, as applied e.g. by Eurostat or the OECD. Given that a number of European countries have decided that nuclear power cannot be part of a sustainable energy mix, we would have preferred to present the analysis excluding nuclear. Unfortunately, it has not been possible to obtain the revised data without nuclear power, or to gain access to the underlying raw data and perform the corrections ourselves. It should be kept in mind, though, that including nuclear only has a small effect on the numbers presented in the following. Nuclear accounts for less than 3% of all LECGS: geothermal or wind contribute 3 to 4 times as much, respectively. Also, it is the least dynamic of the LECGS sectors: of the 24 subsectors included in the LECGS, nuclear (together with alternative fuel vehicles) reported the lowest rate of increase during , at 4%. Thus, the fact that nuclear is included in the dataset is unlikely to affect the results much. Without nuclear, the growth performance of the sector would even have been marginally better. 6 U.K. Department for Business Innovation & Skills, Low Carbon Environmental Goods and Services (LCEGS) Report for 2011/12 3 Development of Eco-Industries Turnover and growth of Eco-Industries Since 2007, the global Low Carbon and Environmental Goods and Services sector has grown by 2% overall from about 3.6 billion to 4.1 billion. Unlike overall economic growth, which fell dramatically in 2008/2009 and then recovered, the growth rate in LCEGS was more stable, averaging between 3-4% in the years covered by this study. Countries experienced very different growth rates in LCEGS between 2007 and While Eco-Industries in Poland and Mexico grew by 5% or more per year, other countries like the US or Portugal experienced only modest growth in LCEGS of less than 2% per year. Figure 1: Size of the LCEGS sector (in % of GDP) and annual growth, The absolute size of the LCEGS in comparison to overall GDP differed less in the sample countries. The biggest LCEGS sectors provided just over 5% of GDP, while the smallest were around 3.5% of GDP. It is worth noting here that the comparison with GDP figures is only indicative as the turnover figures provided for Eco-industries use a different methodology than the value-added methodology of GDP. Interestingly, there is no correlation between GDP shares of LCEGS and annual growth rates, i.e. there is no conclusion as to whether the laggards are catching up, or the pioneers expanding their lead. Overall growth in LCECS was stable but slightly lower than GDP growth in the study period. One important reason for this was the cycle of government spending in that period. Many sub sectors of LCEGS depend on public spending (e.g. the water industries) or government subsidies or other support frameworks (e.g. renewable energy). In nearly all governments increased spending significantly, preventing any downturn for the sector, but, on the other hand, the austerity measures enacted since 2010 by many governments have clearly affected the sector s growth. Additionally, the lack of investment in developed economies during the period as a whole has limited growth in the LCEGS sector, due to its strong orientation in capital investment goods. 813 Lastly, it is important to reiterate that the LCEGS sector is a diverse amalgam comprising subsectors with relatively low growth (e.g. air pollution or alternative vehicle fuels) and sectors growing much stronger than the average (wind or solar PV). The following table provides more detail on the global growth of LCEGS sectors. Sector Annual average growth Overall share of LCEGS (2011) Air Pollution 1.9% 0.9% Contaminated Land Reclamation & Remediation 2.9% 0.9% Environmental Consultancy and Related Services 3.1% 0.8% Environmental Monitoring, Instrumentation and Analysis 3.2% 0.1% Marine Pollution Control 3.2% 0.1% Noise & Vibration control 3.3% 0.2% Recovery and Recycling 3.0% 6.1% Waste Management 2.6% 4.5% Water Supply and Waste water Treatment 2.4% 7.5% Additional Energy sources 11.4% 1.5% Alternative Fuel Vehicles 1.1% 10.3% Alternative Fuels 4.6% 16.2% Nuclear Power 1.1% 2.8% Building Technologies 2.8% 12.6% Carbon Capture & Storage 3.2% 0.4% Carbon Finance 8.1% 1.2% Energy Management 3.6% 2.4% Biomass 3.4% 4.6% Geothermal 2.9% 9.0% Hydro 3.2% 0.4% Photovoltaic 3.6% 4.7% Renewable consulting 6.3% 0.6% Wave & Tidal 3.2% 0.1% Wind 4.3% 12.0% Table 1: Growth rates and shares of different LCEGS sub-sectors This means that overall growth in the LCEGS market was very concentrated in specific subsectors. Globally, wind energy production provided more than 20% of total growth in this period. All new renewable energy production sectors combined (Wind, Geothermal, Photovoltaic and Biomass) were responsible for about 40% of the growth of the total LCEGS sector. Other important growth drivers were additional energy sources and waste and water management. 914 3.2 Competitiveness and Resilience of Eco-Industries As mentioned above, the growth rates of the LCEGS sector were more stable than overall economic growth in the study period (see Table 2). 7 While nearly all countries suffered a drop in overall economic activity in , the LCEGS sector grew in that period in all but two countries of our sample (US and Portugal, which saw a small contraction of LCEGS in 2009). Remarkably, for every year in Italy and Portugal, annual growth in LCEGS has been higher than the respective GDP growth. Across the entire study period, LCEGS growth was higher than GDP growth in all European countries except Poland, i.e. the LCEGS sector has outperformed the wider economy. In the cases of Italy and Portugal, nominal GDP has stagnated between 2008 and 2011, yet the LCEGS sector has grown by 9.4 and 5%, respectively. Poland stands out in that it has achieved the highest relative growth of the LCEGS sector at 23.6% between 2008 and 2011 and yet, because nominal GDP has grown even more in this period, it is the one European country where LCEGS has grown in line with GDP, rather than acting as a driver of growth in turbulent times. For the non-european countries in our sample the development was quite different. China saw a much slower growth in the LCEGS sector than in the overall economy in fact since the LCEGS growth rates are nominal growth rates, the Chinese LCEGS sector may not have grown at all in real terms. In the US, the LCEGS sector only outperformed the economy in the crisis year 2009, but not for the study period as a whole. In the case of Mexico, LCEGS growth was generally in line with GDP growth: somewhat stronger in the crisis year 2009, and weaker in the other years, For the global LCEGS sector, growth was somewhat slower in 2009 than in other years, but remained positive LCEGS GDP LCEGS GDP LCEGS GDP LCEGS GDP LCEGS GDP China 1.8% 18.1% 1.8% 8.6% 2.0% 17.8% 2.1% 17.8% 7.9% 78.0% Germany 3.0% 1.9% 3.0% -4.0% 3.5% 5.1% 3.5% 4.6% 13.6% 7.5% Italy 2.1% 1.3% 2.1% -3.5% 2.4% 2.1% 2.5% -0.8% 9.4% -1.0% Mexico 5.8% 7.5% 5.9% -1.3% 6.5% 9.4% 6.6% 9.0% 27.2% 26.5% Poland 5.1% 8.4% 5.1% 5.4% 5.7% 7.9% 5.9% 4.4% 23.6% 28.7% Portugal n/a 1.6% -1.3% -2.0% 3.1% 2.6% 3.1% -1.0% 4.9% 1.1% UK 4.3% 2.4% 4.3% -3.1% 4.7% 4.8% 4.8% 3.5% 19.4% 7.6% US 0.8% 1.7% -0.5% -2.1% 2.5% 3.7% 2.5% 3.8% 5.4% 7.2% World 3.1% 1.8% 3.2% 3.8% 12.4% Table 2: Growth rates in LCEGS and GDP for eight countries, Source: Eurostat and IMF 7 Please note that Table 2 presents nominal growth rates for both LCEGS and GDP, i.e. not accounting for price changes, hence the very high growth rates for Chinese GDP. Producing inflation-adjusted growth rates for a particular sector (such as LCEGS) can be misleading, as the commonly used GDP deflators only consider the average rice in prices for a representative range of goods and services. Appling such a general deflator to a particular sector may not capture adequately the reality of this sector; therefore the table presents nominal growth rates. 1015 Generally, the market share of European Eco-Industries in the global market did not change during or after the crisis. The EU-28 Eco-Industries grew at the same speed as the global Eco-Industries and the market share of EU-28 producers stayed at 22% from 2008 to The same is true for the different sub-sectors of the Eco-industries. In all sub-sectors the market share of European producers remained fairly constant over the study period. As the European economy was growing much slower in the respective period than the world economy, this is a substantial achievement. It underscores the competitiveness of European Eco-Industries and could provide justification for a strong, continued commitment to a green economic transition. 1116 4 Innovation in the Eco-Industries While innovation may not be as important of an input for more established Eco-Industries like wastewater management, innovation is a production growth factor in the Eco-Industries like any other component of the economy. There are several ways of measuring innovation. Unfortunately each method has drawbacks, in particular when comparing innovations across sectors within an economy or the same sectors in different countries. One of these ways is a post-facto assessment of market capture and market leadership over time. In the country assessments below, we provide snapshots of the present position of the respective countries in some of the key Eco-Industries. This chapter looks at two other proxy measures used to indicate innovation potential: R&D spending (both public and private) as one major input to the innovation activity, and the number of patents filed in a country as one major output of innovation activity. These measures are not foolproof measures of innovation, and have their limitations especially when drawing comparisons across countries, but they have proven robustly indicative of innovation potential. 4.1 Patenting activity in environmental industries The number of patens issued to applicants from a particular industry, or from a particular country, is often used to approximate the innovativeness of industries. Patents represent one key output of the innovation activity, and patenting activity is well document. Yet, while there is certainly a correlation between innovation and patenting, it should be acknowledged that patent data has some limitations as an indicator of innovativeness. First, not all inventions are patented; second, the raw patenting data does not allow to distinguish the value of a patent (all patented inventions have to be novel, but some patented inventions are more innovative than others); and third, the propensity to patent and the patent regime differ between countries. 8 Finally, much of the private R&D takes place in multinational enterprises, the patent may be counted towards the country where the company is based, which may not necessarily be the same country where the research has taken place that has led to the invention. These limitations mean comparisons of patenting data across countries, across technologies or across economic sectors need to be viewed with some caution. Nonetheless, some insights can be inferred from them Patenting activity in environmental industries across countries Drawing on international patenting data, the OECD has developed the indicator of environmental technologies (ENV-Tech Indicator), which provides good evidence on the patents issued for a defined set of environment-related technologies across the OECD countries and a number of non-oecd countries. 9 The environment-related technologies are 8 OECD, Energy and Climate Policy: Bending the Technological Trajectory, See  1217 grouped into seven categories, from general environmental management (water, air or waste management) to renewable energies to energy efficiency technologies in transport and buildings. Figure 2 presents the patenting activity in all environment-related technologies (as identified by the OECD) for the period , for the eight countries analysed in greater depth in this paper. Some notable facts can be observed: first, with the exception of one year (2003), patenting activity has increased continuously, but particularly in the late 1990s and since The financial and economic crisis, starting in 2008, may have reduced the growth rate of patent applications, but did not lead to an absolute decline in the number of patent applications. Second, of the eight countries considered here, patenting activity is essentially limited to the five biggest countries the US, Germany, China, the UK and Italy. The remaining three (Poland, Portugal and Mexico) account for less than one percent of the patent applications from the eight-country set. Given the acknowledged limitations for comparing patenting data across countries, however, this fact should be interpreted with caution. Third, and again acknowledging the limitations in cross-country comparisons, it is noticeable that while US-based applicants have filed most applications throughout, the absolute number is only about 50% higher than for Germany; in the late-1990s, Germany almost reached parity in terms of the number of patent applications. Third, China has been gaining ground: starting from zero patents in 1990, China overtook the UK in 2008 as the third largest country in the eight-country set. Figure 2: Number of patent applications for environment-related technologies in eight selected countries, Source: OECD ENV-Tech Indicator Set A comparison of country-specific growth rates in patenting activity is of limited value, due to the small absolute number of patent applications in most of the countries concerned. Thus, the number of patent applications in China has increased 11-fold between 2000 and 2009, yet starting from a low base of only 43 patent applications during Likewise, applications have increased sixfold in Poland and still more than threefold in Portugal. For the three countries in the set that already had a mature patenting activity already in 2000 Germany, the UK and the US, with some 3,200 patent applications among them the rate of increase from 2000 to 2009 has been more modest, ranging from 65% in Germany and the UK to 90% in the US. 1318 4.1.2 Patenting activity for selected environment-related technologies Figure 3 presents an overview of the patent applications in the EU-28 for nine selected environment-related technologies. The bottom three technologies are examples of typical environmental management technologies: water pollution abatement, air pollution abatement and waste management. The middle three represent the most important renewable energy technologies in Europe (wind energy, solar PV and biofuels). The top three are selected examples of technologies related to energy use and energy efficiency: energy storage technologies, technologies specific to propulsion using electric motors (e.g. electric vehicle, hybrid vehicle), and insulation technologies (e.g. thermal insulation or double glazing). Taken together, these nine technologies accounted for about 60% of all patent applications for environment-related technologies filed in the EU-28 in One key insight is, again, that the growth in patenting activity has accelerated markedly since 2005, and that the 2008 financial and economic crisis has only temporarily dented this growth trend, but did not reverse it. In fact, only for one of the nine technologies (electric vehicle technologies) the number of patent applications declined from 2007 to A second remarkable point is that the growth in patenting activity comes predominantly from the energy-related technologies (both renewable energy technologies and energy efficiency). By contrast, the development in the classical environmental management technologies which accounted for the bulk of environment-related technology patents still in 2000 was more sluggish. Figure 3: Patent applications for selected environment-related technologies in the EU- 28, Source: OECD ENV-Tech Indicator Set The impression of an uneven growth in patenting activities for the different sectors is also evident from Figure 4, which presents the growth in patenting relative to the year Apart from documenting the stellar growth in patenting for renewable energy technologies (with patent applications for solar PV, biofuels and wind energy increasing by a factor of seven, six and five respectively), it also documents that the patenting activity for all environment-related technologies has been stronger than the average for all patent applications. Since 2006, the 1419 number of patent applications has remained almost constant (at about 30% above the 2000 level), whereas the number of patent applications for environment-related technologies has continued to increase, and was twice as high in 2009 compared to This also implies that the share of environment-related technologies as a share of all patents has grown from 6.6% in 2000 to 10.5% in One other notable observation is that the growth in patenting activity for classical environmental management technologies (air, water, waste) has been slower than for the energy-related technologies in the set here, the growth in patenting activity was largely in line with the overall growth in patents, or at times somewhat weaker. Figure 4: Patenting activity for selected technologies in the EU-28, (2000 = 100). Source: OECD ENV-Tech Indicator Set Patenting activity in Europe compared to the US and China Finally, this section assesses how the patenting activity for environment-related technologies in the EU-28 compares to the US and China as two major competitors on the world market for such technologies. Again recalling the limitations of the patenting data for cross-country comparison, the analysis compares the patenting record for the nine selected technologies. For the classical environmental management technologies (water pollution abatement, air pollution abatement and waste management), the technological leadership currently clearly rests with the EU. Not only did the EU account for at least half (or, in the case of waste management, two thirds) of the joint patent applications of the three. Patent applications also increased between 2006/2007 and 2008/2009, albeit at a much slower rate than for the energy-related technologies. By comparison, China achieved a higher growth of patent applications in water and air pollution abatement, yet starting from a low level. In the US, the number of patent applications declined for all three environmental management technologies between 2006/2007 and 2008/2009. The analysis also confirm the earlier observation that, while there has been some growth in the number of patent applications for environmental management technologies since 2000, this growth is much smaller than for the energyrelated technologies. In absolute numbers, though, the number of patent applications for the different technologies is of a comparable magnitude. 1520 Figure 5: Number of patent applications for selected environmental management technologies in the EU, China and the US, Source: OECD ENV-Tech Renewable energy technologies witnessed very rapid growth of patenting activity, especially since Among the three countries / regions considered, the US has the technological leadership for Solar PV and Biofuels technologies, while the EU leads for wind. China, again, accounts for a smaller but rapidly growing share of the patent applications. Between 5 and 11% of the joint patent applications in the three countries came from China and the number of patent applications was growing at 40 50% per annum between 2006/2007 and 2008/2009). In fact, all countries saw a rapid growth in patent applications in this period but in Europe less so than in China and the US. For wind, for instance, patent applications in Europe grew by almost 30% per year between 2006/2007 and 2008/2009 which is remarkable, but not fast enough to prevent US and China from catching up. For Solar PV, the situation is even between the EU and the US, with a slightly higher share of patents in the US, but a marginally higher growth rate of patenting in the EU. China features a higher growth rate than both EU and US, but also still has some distance to cover. For Biofuels, the EU position is weaker to begin with, and added to this growth in patents is lower than in China and the US. 1621 Figure 6: Number of patent applications for selected renewable energy technologies in the EU, China and the US, Source: OECD ENV-Tech Indicator Set For energy efficiency technologies, the picture is similar to renewables in the sense that patenting activity has accelerated markedly since Also notable is the outlier year 2008, when growth in patenting was much lower than in the preceding and the following year (mostly due to a falling number of patents for electric vehicle technologies in Europe). In terms of technological leadership, Europe is well-positioned: among the three countries and regions, the EU accounted for 70% of patents in electric vehicle technologies in 2009, for almost two thirds of insulation technologies, and just below half of energy storage. Also, the EU has the highest growth rate for patents on electric vehicle technologies in 2006/ /2009, and is on par with China for patent growth in energy storage technologies. Figure 7: Number of patent applications for selected energy efficiency technologies in the EU, China and the US, Source: OECD ENV-Tech Indicator Set 1722 Finally, the following table presents an overview of the data presented in the graphs above, focusing here on the each country or region s share of patenting activity among the three, as well as the annual growth of patent applications between 2006/2007 and 2008/2009 (i.e. based on the respective two-year average figures). From a European perspective, the table demonstrates that the EU is very well positioned for waste management and electric vehicles and, to a lesser degree, energy storage where it leads innovation activity with an increasing margin. For a number of technologies, such as air and water pollution abatement, wind energy and insulation, the EU is currently the technological leader, but the gap is closing particularly due to rapid innovation in China. Finally, for solar PV and in particular for biofuels, the EU is neither the technological leader nor does it feature the highest growth rates. Table 3: Shares and growth rates of patent applications for environment-related technologies, EU, China and USA EU-28 China USA Share Growth rate Share Growth rate Share Growth rate Air pollution abatement 60.2% -0.3% 2.1% 14.4% 37.6% -5.9% Water pollution abatement 54.9% 4.2% 9.4% 14.2% 35.7% -5.0% Waste management 64.6% 8.1% 7.9% 4.1% 27.5% -7.1% Wind energy 61.2% 28.6% 10.7% 50.6% 28.2% 54.5% Solar PV 44.3% 27.1% 5.0% 41.5% 50.7% 26.2% Biofuels 38.7% 8.7% 4.8% 51.6% 56.4% 12.6% Energy storage 48.6% 39.1% 8.6% 40.8% 42.8% 17.1% Electric vehicles 70.4% 26.6% 8.9% 13.5% 20.7% 10.0% Insulation 64.8% 7.3% 12.2% 19.9% 23.0% -12.5% Note: Share refers to the share of the respective country or region in the total of the three countries and regions in 2009; Growth rate is the annual growth between the 2006/2007 and the 2008/2009 two-year average. Source: OECD ENV-Tech Indicator Set. 1823 4.2 Public funding for environmental research Complementing the earlier discussion, which looked as patents for environment-related technologies as one of the most important and most easily quantifiable outputs of innovation activity, the following section looks at one important input to innovation: public research funding. The following table provides an overview of public funding for environmental research in selected countries between 1991 and The indicator used is the share of environmental research in total state expenditure for civil R&D. 10 Table 4: Share of environmental research in state expenditure for civil R&D, Germany Italy Poland Portugal UK Mexico US EU OECD Source: BMU Report on the Environmental Economy One observation is that the share of funding is consistently higher in Europe than in the US. This might be seen as a contradiction to the fact that the US is en par with the EU in terms of the patents generated. However, the observed differences may also be due to a higher propensity to patent in the US, or to structural differences in the way that R&D funding is measured. What is also remarkable is that the shares do not exhibit any particular trend in some countries, there are considerable variations year-on-year, in others the trends were fairly static. But in no country was there a clear trend to increase the share of environmental research funding: where this occurred (e.g. Italy in 2007/2008, or Portugal 2004/2005), it was mostly as a short-lived expansion, after which the share returned to previous levels. Germany is notable: despite its credentials as a green technology leader in Europe, the share of environmental R&D funding has actually fallen since the 1990s. 10 Bundesministerium für Umwelt, Naturschutz und Reaktorsicherheit and Umweltbundesamt, Report on the Environmental Economy Facts & Figures for Germany. 11 Ibid.,24 5 Country Briefs 5.1 European countries Germany The performance of the German Eco-Industries stands out in several ways: first, Germany is one of the leaders in Europe in terms of the transformation to a green economy, particular in terms of decarbonising the energy sector and promoting energy from renewable sources. In 2010, Germany alone accounted for more than half of all new PV solar installation worldwide. 12 Second, the German economy is also one of the most industrialized economies in the EU, with a large export-oriented manufacturing sector. With an energy sector that was traditionally reliant on coal, it is also among the more carbon-intensive economies in Europe, and, despite the reductions achieved, its per-capita CO 2 emissions remain above the EU average. Third, the German economy has gone through the financial and economic crisis relatively unscathed: while GDP contracted by 4% in 2009, this drop was compensated by a GDP rise of 5.1% in 2010 and 4.6% in 2011 (all in real terms). When looking at the performance of the environmental goods and services sector in Germany, the picture is very positive overall, with a few minor weaknesses. Thus, the general trend has been a rapid growth of the market for environmental goods and services. Yet this growth was achieved almost exclusively in the climate-related sectors. The bricksand-mortar environmental goods and services (such as waste treatment, water management, soil remediation or air protection equipment), which had traditionally dominated the environmental industry, has remained relatively stagnant during the last decade. 13 For wastewater treatment investment in particular, there was a declining trend from , as the infrastructure investment backlog in the former GDR had been cleared during the 1990s. Expenditure on pollution abatement and control expenditure is largely stagnant. Due to the rapid expansion of climate-related activities, and in particular renewable energy deployment, these activities have come to dominate the environmental industry sector in Germany. According to Federal Statistical Office s (DESTATIS) definition of EGS, the total turnover of environmental goods and services sector came to 44.6 billion Euro in 2009 (2% of GDP), of which climate-related goods and services accounted for more than half (about 27 billion Euro), the remainder being distributed between waste, water, noise and air. Solar PV alone accounts for 8 billion Euro of the 27 billion of climate-related turnover. 14 While these figures are based on the definition of environmental goods and services used by DESTATIS, the environment ministry uses a broader definition of environmental technology services 12 OECD, OECD Environmental Performance Reviews, Ibid. 14 Ibid. 20

        Low Carbon and Environmental Goods and Services: an industry analysis Update for 2008/09 Innovas Solutions Ltd March 2010 In partnership with 1 Copyright Crown copyright, 2010 The views expressed within    

        Summary of the Impact assessment for a 2030 climate and energy policy framework Contents Overview a. Drivers of electricity prices b. Jobs and growth c. Trade d. Energy dependence A. Impact assessment    

        Netherlands National Energy Outlook 2014 Summary Michiel Hekkenberg (ECN) Martijn Verdonk (PBL) (project coordinators) February 2015 ECN-E --15-005 Netherlands National Energy Outlook 2014 Summary 2 The    

        Methodologies for assessing Green Jobs Policy Brief Introduction By pioneering sustainable economic activities, both developed and developing countries stand to generate new jobs and strengthen their economies,    

        Good afternoon, and thanks to the Energy Dialogue for your kind invitation to speak today. Europe is at the forefront of a global transition to a cleaner energy economy. At the same time globally energy    

        World Energy Outlook 29 Presentation to the Press London, 1 November 29 The context The worst economic slump since the 2 nd World War & signs of recovery but how fast? An oil price collapse & then a rebound    

        The Global Commission on the Economy and Climate Major Economies Forum, Paris Jeremy Oppenheim, Programme Director 11 th July 2014 Purpose of the Global Commission Reframe the debate about economic growth    

        Germany Energy efficiency report Objectives: 231 TWh of end-user energy savings by 216 Overview 29 2-29 (% / year) Primary intensity (EU=1) 1 99 + -1.3% - CO 2 intensity (EU=1) 16 - -1.6% - CO 2 emissions    

        World Energy Outlook 27: China and India Insights www.worldenergyoutlook.org International Energy Agency Why Focus on China & India? Increase in World Primary Energy Demand, Imports & Energy-Related CO    

        Renewable Energy in the UK Dr John Roberts CBE FREng Renewable Energy in the UK Legislation and Targets: Technology: International Frameworks EU Context National Context Overview and outlook for key renewable    

        Statement of Lawrence W. Kavanagh Vice President, Environment and Technology American Iron and Steel Institute Washington, D.C. Submitted for the Record Committee on Small Business U.S. House of Representatives    

        The Size and Health of the UK Space Industry A Report for the UK Space Agency Executive Summary Front cover image: Living Planet Program Credit: ESA - P Carril Artist s impression of HYLAS Credit: Avanti    

        LOW CARBON AND ENVIRONMENTAL GOODS AND SERVICES (LCEGS) Report for 2009/10 JULY 2011 Low Carbon and Environmental Goods and Services (LCEGS) Report for 2009/10 July 2011 Commissioned by the Department    

        Port Jackson Partners NOT JUST A CARBON HIT ON ELECTRICITY PRICES Many factors will drive a doubling of electricity prices in many states by 15. This will have a major impact on virtually all businesses.    

        Fifteenth inventory 2013 edition Worldwide electricity production from renewable energy sources Stats and figures series This inventory was carried out by Observ ER and Fondation Énergies pour le Monde    

        8 Key Finfings Energy Transition The German Energiewende By Craig Morris, Martin Pehnt An initiative of the Heinrich Böll Foundation Released on 28 November 2012 Revised July 2015 www. 8 Key Findings German    

        SPANISH EXPERIENCE IN RENEWABLE ENERGY AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY Anton Garcia Diaz Economic Bureau of the Prime Minister «Symposium on Strengthening Sino-Spain cooperation in multiple Fields» New Energy Cooperation    

        Low Carbon Green Growth Roadmap for Asia and the Pacific CASE STUDY Finding a green engine for economic growth China s renewable energy policies Key points China s renewable energy industry has been elevated    

        Excerpt from: 2 - EXCERPT FROM ELECTRICITY INFORMATION (2015 edition) The following analysis is an excerpt from the publication Electricity Information (2015 edition). Please note that we strongly advise    

        Compendium: Chapter 1: Economic commentary This section of the Pink Book provides an examination of recent trends, main movements and international comparisons for a range of information contained in subsequent    

        Policy statement Energy efficiency: a world business perspective Prepared by the Commission on Environment & Energy Key messages Energy efficiency is a fundamental element in progress towards a sustainable    

        Is Germany in the slow lane for low carbon heat? Our latest research challenges the conventional wisdom that the best growth opportunities for low carbon heat in Europe are in Germany Delta-ee Whitepaper    

        Brief March 2013 Full speed ahead An industrial strategy for the UK automotive sector David Leach industrial strategy CBI email: david.leach@cbi.org.uk The automotive industry is the UK s largest sector    

        Automation Industry Market Report The Global Industrial Automation Industry After weathering a difficult economic recession, the global automation industry is once again on the upswing, with many industry    

        World Energy Outlook 2013 London, 12 November The world energy scene today Some long-held tenets of the energy sector are being rewritten Countries are switching roles: importers are becoming exporters    

        Building a Low-Carbon Economy The UK's Contribution to Tackling Climate Change www.theccc.org.uk Structure of the presentation 1. The 2050 target 2. The first three budgets 3. Wider social and economic    

        Carbon pricing and the competitiveness of nuclear power by J.H. Keppler and C. Marcantonini* recent NEA study entitled Carbon Pricing, Power A Markets and the Competitiveness of Energy assesses the competitiveness    

        DANIEL M. KAMMEN GREGORY F. NEMET Reversing the Incredible Shrinking Energy R&D Budget The federal government and private industry are both reducing their investments in energy research and development    

        Flash Eurobarometer INNOVATION IN THE PUBLIC SECTOR: ITS PERCEPTION IN AND IMPACT ON BUSINESS REPORT Fieldwork: February-March 22 Publication: June 22 This survey has been requested by the European Commission,    

        International Solar Energy Arena January 23rd, 2009, Istanbul STEAM (Strategic Technical Economic Research Center) Good morning. Sayin Bakanım. Members of Parliament. Ladies and Gentlemen. Slide 1: Opening    

        The Commercial Case for Investing in UK Cleantech A joint publication by Cambridge Cleantech and the University of Cambridge Centre for Climate Change Mitigation Research 2 The Commercial Case for Investing    

        CREATING AN INNOVATION AGENDA TO GENERATE SUSTAINABLE GROWTH, ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND JOBS IN EUROPE BERT COLIJN AND BART VAN ARK NEUJOBS DELIVERABLE NO. 3.9 A discussion brief focusing on: Abstract The    

        Price developments on the EU retail markets for electricity and gas 1998 2011 The Market Observatory for Energy has analysed price developments on the retail markets for electricity and natural gas (domestic    

        June 2015 Levelized Cost and Levelized Avoided Cost of New Generation Resources in the Annual Energy Outlook 2015 This paper presents average values of levelized costs for generating technologies that    

        Explanation beyond exchange rates: trends in UK trade since 2007 Author Name(s): Michael Hardie, Andrew Jowett, Tim Marshall & Philip Wales, Office for National Statistics Abstract The UK s trade performance    

        EMBARGO 16.01 GMT (London Time) on MONDAY, DECEMBER 7, 2015 / 17.01 CET (Paris Time) DECEMBER 7, 2015 / 11.01 US EST DECEMBER 7, 2015 Global CO 2 emissions projected to stall in 2015 Global carbon emissions    

        1/ X. INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 1/ 10.1 Overview of World Economy Latest indicators are increasingly suggesting that the significant contraction in economic activity has come to an end, notably    

        Executive Summary Energy management must become more sustainable and less dependent on increasingly scarce fossil fuels. Energy is a fundamental element of the economy, and the Netherlands must do more    

        GLOBAL RENEWABLE ENERGY MARKET OUTLOOK 213 FACT PACK GUY TURNER HEAD OF ECONOMICS AND COMMODITIES APRIL 26, 213 GLOBAL RENEWABLE ENERGY MARKET OUTLOOK, 26 APRIL 213 1 INTRODUCTION This year s Global Renewable    

        Nuclear power is part of the solution for fighting climate change "Nuclear for Climate" is an initiative undertaken by the members of the French Nuclear Energy Society (SFEN), the American Nuclear Society    

        Date Issue Brief # I S S U E B R I E F Falling Oil Prices and US Economic Activity: Implications for the Future Stephen P.A. Brown December 2014 Issue Brief 14-06 Resources for the Future Resources for    

        Energy Projections 2006 2030 Price and Policy Considerations Dr. Randy Hudson Oak Ridge National Laboratory There is perhaps no single current topic so potentially impacting to all life on this planet    

        Economic Review, April 2012 Author Name(s): Malindi Myers, Office for National Statistics Abstract This note provides some wider economic analysis to support the Statistical Bulletin relating to the latest    

        Executive Summary Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 2015 Edition  Projected Costs of Generating Electricity 2015 Edition INTERNATIONAL ENERGY AGENCY NUCLEAR ENERGY AGENCY ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC    

        TRENDS 2015 IN PHOTOVOLTAIC APPLICATIONS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY Report IEA-PVPS T1-27:2015 FOREWORD.... The IEA PVPS Programme is proud to provide you with its 20 th edition of the international survey report    

        Energy storage in the UK and Korea: Innovation, Investment and Co-operation Appendix.1: Stakeholder interviews from Korea Peter Taylor & Lloyd Davies, University of Leeds Appendix.1: Stakeholder interviews    

        Fact Sheet on China s energy sector and Danish solutions 1. EXPANSION WITH RENEWABLE ENERGY: China focuses on a massive expansion with non fossil energy that is renewable energy and nuclear energy. The    

        PROJECT NO 518294 SES6 CASES COST ASSESSMENT OF SUSTAINABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS Observatoire Méditerranéen de l Energie WP1 Task 1 The Drivers of Electricity Demand and Supply Version April 2007 1. Drivers    

        Some micro- and macro-economics of offshore wind* EPSRC SUPERGEN Wind Energy Hub University of Strathclyde May 2016 Fraser of Allander Institute Energy Modelling Team Fraser of Allander Institute Department    

        Main trends in industry in 2014 and thoughts on future developments (April 2015) Development of the industrial sector in 2014 After two years of recession, industrial production returned to growth in 2014.    

        Project LINK Meeting New York, - October 1 Country Report: Australia Prepared by Peter Brain: National Institute of Economic and Industry Research, and Duncan Ironmonger: Department of Economics, University    

        World Energy Outlook Dr. Fatih Birol IEA Chief Economist Paris, 27 February 2014 The world energy scene today Some long-held tenets of the energy sector are being rewritten Countries are switching roles:    

        SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY ASSOCIATION FACTBOOK The data included in the 2014 SIA Factbook helps demonstrate the strength and promise of the U.S. semiconductor industry and why it is critical for policymakers    

        Our financing of the energy sector in 213 rbs.com/sustainable About this document This report is the fourth Our financing of the energy sector briefing that we have produced since 21. The aim remains the    

        EU renewable energy and biofuel targets what will they mean? Background The EU Commission has today tabled proposals for reductions in carbon dioxide emissions a 20% cut by 2020. Alongside this legally    

        UNIVERSITY OF TWENTE Renewable energy business and policy in Europe, in brief Presentation for the Energy Conference, Ener2i project, Yerevan, 2 October, 2015 Yoram Krozer, University Twente - CSTM and    

        Munich Re Economic Research May 2014 Premium growth is again slowly gathering momentum After a rather restrained 2013 (according to partly preliminary data), we expect growth in global primary insurance    

        Estonia and the European Debt Crisis Juhan Parts Estonia has had a quick recovery from the recent recession and its economy is in better shape than before the crisis. It is now much leaner and significantly    

        Growing the Green Economy Labour Green Economy Paper.indd 1 05/02/2016 17:44 Our Plan Establish a green infrastructure fund worth 1bn. We recognise the need to fund immediate action on climate change.    

        White Certificates Trading, Green Certificates Trading, Emission Trading Which One to Choose? Dr. Xiaodong Wang, EASCS September 11, 2013 Structure of the Presentation Context: Chinese government s commitment    

        Promoting Innovation, Small Business Enterprise and Job Creation through Solar Energy Technologies A Submission to the Standing Committee on Finance Pre-Budget Consultations 2010 Prepared by the: Canadian    

        Economic and Market Outlook EU Automobile Industry March 2015 Report 1 of 4 2015 CONTENTS EU ECONOMIC FORECASTS... 2 PASSENGER CARS... 4 REGISTRATIONS... 4 WORLD... 4 THE EUROPEAN UNION... 6 PRODUCTION...    

        October 2013 Decarbonisation and the Economy An empirical analysis of the economic impact of energy and climate change policies in Denmark, Sweden, Germany, UK and The Netherlands Our scope and process    

        Hungarian National Environmental Technology Innovation Strategy Dr. Martina MAKAI Ministry of Rural Development WHY ESTABLISHING THE NEW STRATEGY? Global crisis as challenge & opportunity for: greening    

        Business Plan For an EU Environmental Technologies Verification (ETV) Scheme October 2009 Report prepared by Beta Technology Contact: Caroline Wadsworth Beta Technology Limited Barclay Court Doncaster    

        EUROSYSTEM STAFF MACROECONOMIC PROJECTIONS FOR THE EURO AREA On the basis of the information available up to 22 May 2009, Eurosystem staff have prepared projections for macroeconomic developments in the    

        Agricultural Policy Perspectives Brief April 2014 EU-10 AND THE CAP 10 YEARS OF SUCCESS Thinkstockphotos.com CONTENTS 1. Structural Adjustment 2. Income 3. CAP expenditure 4. Land Tenure 5. Prices and    

        4 Distribution of Income and Wealth 53 54 Indicator 4.1 Income per capita in the EU Indicator defined National income (GDP) in per capita (per head of population) terms expressed in Euro and adjusted for    

        The 2010 Nonprofit Fundra aising Survey Funds Raised in 20100 Compared with 2009 March 2011 The Nonprof fit Research Collaborative With special thanks to the representatives of 1,845 charitable organizations    

        Contracts for Difference and Electricity Market Reform LEAD OFFICER: REPORT AUTHOR: John Groves Denice Gallen Summary and Recommendation: This seeks to define Contracts for Difference (CfDs) and their    

        IIPS Japan Policy Commentary EU Energy Policy and the Energy Situation in Germany By Mikihiko Shimizu Senior Research Fellow at IIPS Introduction Japan s energy policy is undergoing fundamental review    

        U.S. Department of Commerce International Trade Administration Introduction Exports Support American Jobs Updated measure will quantify progress as global economy recovers. On March 11, 21, President Barack    

        Canadian Environmental Sector Trends L A B O U R M A R K E T S T U D Y 2010 ECO CANADA ECO Canada develops programs that help individuals build meaningful environmental careers, provides employers with    

        India Energy efficiency report Objectives: 5% of savings in energy consumption by 215 Overview 29 2-29 (% / year) Primary intensity (EU=1) 1 164 -- -2.9% ++ CO 2 intensity (EU=1) 181 -- -1.2% -- CO 2 emissions    

        General Certificate of Education Advanced Level Examination January 2010 Economics ECON4 Unit 4 The National and International Economy Tuesday 2 February 2010 1.30 pm to 3.30 pm For this paper you must    

        EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 7 Executive Summary Innovation in energy technology has widespread implications for OECD economies. Although the energy sector accounts for a small share of GDP, the pervasive use of    

        Eurozone EY Eurozone Forecast September 213 Austria Belgium Cyprus Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Portugal Slovakia Slovenia Spain Outlook for Finland    

        Energy Megatrends 2020 Esa Vakkilainen 1 NOTE The data included in the following is mainly based on International Energy Agency's (IEA) World Energy Outlook 2007 IEA is considered the most reliable source    

        The global green race: a business review of UK competitiveness in low carbon markets 1 2 Green business: a global success story 3 Resource and climate challenges have driven investment and growth Steady    

        FORTNIGHTLY PUBLIC UTILITIES Reliability Standards A fresh look at benefits, costs, and consequences. January 2015 ENERGY, MONEY, POWER PLUS A Role for Coal Falling Demand New York s Distributed Future    

        EFN REPORT ECONOMIC OUTLOOK FOR THE EURO AREA IN 2013 and 2014 Autumn 2013 1 About the European ing Network The European ing Network (EFN) is a research group of European institutions, founded in 2001    

        How competitive is nuclear energy? by J.H. Keppler* The economic competitiveness of nuclear energy will be crucial for determining its future share in world electricity production. In addition, the widespread    

        Investing in Smart Cities The European Investment Bank (EIB) is the financial arm of the European Union (EU) and is owned by its 28 Member States. Founded in 1958, it operates in the 28 EU Member States    

        Reasons for the drop of Swedish electricity prices Project for Svensk Energi Dr. Lion Hirth Neon Neue Energieökonomik GmbH Karl-Marx-Platz 12, 12043 Berlin, Germany hirth@neon-energie.de Summary report    

        Cogeneration in Europe A brief analysis of the latest Eurostat data (reference year: 213) Brussels, 2 October 215 The European Commission published on 29 June 215 the EU-28 CHP statistics for the year    

        www.pwc.co.uk/economics The World in 2050 The accelerating shift of global economic power: challenges and opportunities January 2011 Table of Contents Summary 3 1. Introduction 4 2. Approach 5 PPPs vs.    

        Reducing CO2 Emissions from New Cars: A Study of Major Car Manufacturers' Progress in 2006 November 2007 1 Reducing CO2 Emissions from New Cars: A Study of Major Car Manufacturers' Progress in 2006 November    

        CEN Identification number in the EC register: 63623305522-13 CENELEC Identification number in the EC register: 58258552517-56 CEN-CENELEC reply to the European Commission's Public Consultation on demand-side    

        KfW Investment Barometer Germany: September Frankfurt, 7 th October Gross fixed capital formation: new figures old problems R&D expenditure now officially counts as investment. The investment rates of    

        Australian Remote Renewables: Opportunities for Investment The largely untapped remote clean energy market and funding support available from the Australian Government creates an attractive opportunity    

        Greenhouse gas abatement potential in Israel Israel s GHG abatement cost curve Translated executive summary, November 2009 1 Executive Summary Background At the December 2009 UNFCCC Conference in Copenhagen,    

        1 Outline 1. Climate and energy: where do we stand? 2. Why a new framework for 2030? 3. How it works 4. Main challenges 5. and benefits 6. Other key points 7. Next steps 2 1. Climate and energy: where    

        CURRENT ANALYSIS May 14 A Look at the Recovery of the Canadian Auto Sector since the 08-09 Recession Chart 1: Motor vehicle production and Canada & US auto sales millions of units 3. Canadian car & truck    

        LONG-TERM OUTLOOK FOR GAS TO 2 35 Eurogas is the association representing the European gas wholesale, retail and distribution sectors. Founded in 1990, its members are some 50 companies and associations    

        Media Information February 18, 2011 voestalpine continues upward trend in the third quarter of 2010/11 EBIT forecast for the 10/11 business year increased to 850 m EUR Revenues grow by more than a quarter    

        Chapter one: Foreword 2. Executive summary This report gives a comprehensive outlook towards an electricity system for Europe and North Africa based completely on renewable energy in 2050. Its particular    

        Critical Policy Options to Protect Industry Competitiveness Graham Weale Chief Economist, RWE AG IEA Energy Business Council Meeting, Paris 4 th June 2013 RWE Group a leading European energy utility >    

        SIXTH FRAMEWORK PROGRAMME [6.1] [ Sustainable Energy Systems] The External and Social Costs of Energy Technologies Rainer Friedrich Universitaet Stuttgart Brussels, February 16, 2009 Social Costs = total    

        Renewable Energy Winner, Loser, or Innocent Victim? by Dallas Burtraw, Joel Darmstadter, Karen Palmer, and James McVeigh Predictions that wind, solar power, and other renewable energy sources would make    

        First Hungarian National Environmental Technology Innovation Strategy (NETIS) Ms. Teodóra KRISTÓF Ministry of Rural Development / Department of Environmental Development Policy, Hungary Berlin, 4 December    