https://www.eea.europa.eu/media/
Do something for our planet, print this page only if needed. Even a small action can make an enormous difference when millions of people do it!Personal tools
For the public:

Ask your question 

Press room 
The EEA Web CMS works best with following browsers:Internet Explorer is not recommended for the CMS area.If you have forgotten your password, 
we can send you a new one.
Skip to content. |

  Skip to navigation

Despite progress in improving the quality of Europe’s lakes, rivers, coastal waters and groundwater sources, pollution, structures like dams, and over-abstraction remain top threats to their long-term health. A vast majority of Europe’s water bodies still fail to meet the European Union’s minimum target for ‘good status’, according to a European Environment Agency ‘state of water’ report published today.

Read more

Reuse of products can reduce material demand and prevent waste, which are important aspects of EU waste policy and essential for achieving a circular economy. However, current approaches to promote reuse in Member States are diverse and rely mostly on voluntary arrangements, according to a European Environment Agency report, published today. While reuse is an established market model for some products, such as cars, similar practices are still in their infancy for most other product groups.

Read more

The European Environment Agency (EEA) has released new data about litter found on Europe’s beaches. Based on nearly 700,000 collected items, disposable plastics are the biggest contributor to marine litter, with cigarette butts and filters being the most commonly found individual items. The new data has been collected by volunteers using the EEA’s Marine LitterWatch mobile app.

Read more

The number of users of the joint European Environment Agency (EEA) – European Commission Climate-ADAPT online knowledge hub has increased fivefold since its launch in 2012, according to an EEA report published today. The assessment confirms the increasing value of the web platform for users such as policy makers, city planners, and other experts who are looking to share and make use of information and best practices in adapting to climate change.

Read more

Videos sent from Bulgaria, Greece, Italy, and Spain won the prizes of the ‘I LIVE GREEN’ video competition announced today. The competition, organised by the European Environment Agency (EEA) and its partner network, attracted more 120 entries from 21 European countries. 

Read more
For references, please go to https://www.eea.europa.eu/media/media-overview or scan the QR code.

        PDF generated on 04 Jul 2018, 11:08 PM
      
For media enquiriesAntti Kaartinen  Press officerMobile: +45 2336 1381 Constant Brand Press officerMobile: +45 2174 1872Katja Rosenbohm Head of CommunicationsMobile: +45 2364 6454For public enquiries: EEA ForumEnvironmental policy making is not an easy task. On the one hand, Europeans want to enjoy the benefits a well-functioning economy provides. On the other, there are significant environmental and ...Read more
                Engineered by:
                EEA Web Team

                Software version:
                
                EEA Plone KGS 18.6.23

                Software updated on
                
                25 June 2018 17:07
                from version 18.6.15





CMS login
Site usage
Software updates history
Code for developers
We use cookies to record some preference settings and to analyse how visitors use our web site. Cookies do not contain any personal information about you. If you wish, see how to delete/disable cookies in your web browser. See also our privacy policy.